MSC2781: Remove the reply fallbacks from the specification (#2781)
matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals: proposals/2781-down-with-the-fallbacks.md

someone new to online messaging would assume, this is a correction to the
previous message. That may even be more obvious to them than if the message was
prefixed with a `*`, since that has been confusing to users in the past. Since
edits would now look exactly like a normal message, they would also be
considerably easier to implement, since you jus need to replace the former
message now, similar to a redaction, and not merge `content` and `new_content`.

## Alternatives

[MSC2589](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2589): This adds the
reply text as an addional key. While this solves the parsing issues, it
doesn't address the other issues with fallbacks.

One could also just stick with the current fallbacks and make all clients pay
the cost for a small number of clients actually benefitting from them.

## Security considerations

Removing the fallback from the spec may lead to issues, when clients experience
the fallback in old events. This should not add any security issues the
client didn't already have from interpreting untrusted html, though. In all
other cases this should **reduce** security issues.

## Unstable prefix

> Seems unnecessary, since this only removes stuff.

Reviewer: An alternate event type or msgtype should be used to avoid confusing clients which rely on the fallback being present under the spec.

Author: But then all clients would fail to render those events, while if you don't use any prefix, it would just look like the fallback is missing, because it is. I believe adding an unstable prefix would actually cause more issues, than it would solve? But if it is really necessary, I will add it of course, but I think this MSC is somewhat of a weird case. Basically you are saying all message types would need to be prefixed from a client implementing this MSC?

Reviewer: The point is that clients have to opt into the MSC's behaviour while the MSC is not included in the spec, so they need some way of doing it. It's not safe to assume that existing clients will be happy about the fallback being missing.

Reviewer 2: Surely changing the reply type of the replies is going to be even more of a breaking change?

Reviewer: The ***event type*** or ***message type*** - changing the reply type is not recommended.

Author: In my opinion changing the msgtype or event type is even more of a breaking change than changing the content of `body` and `formatted_body`. I somehow doubt even half of the clients will render messages correctly in that case. On the other hand, if you just drop the fallback, in the worst case clients should treat the event as any other event, but from my testing no client actually broke, just old Riot/Android didn't show replies anymore. Changing the reply type is at least somewhat reasonable, since then this only affects replies and normal messages should still render as before. I guess there is no other MSC with namespacing yet, that removes a key and which could be used to compare the approach with?

Reviewer 3: Are there really more clients that are confused by a lack of reply fallback than clients that are confused by unknown message types?

There's no way to avoid confusion altogether, so it should be minimized instead.

Reviewer: > In my opinion changing the msgtype or event type is even more of a breaking change than changing the content of body and formatted_body.

Honestly, this is the point of this section. The unstable prefix stuff only applies while the MSC is not in the spec. Once in the spec, clients are expected to follow suit with the change and the unstable prefix no longer needs to be used. Until then, clients *need* a way to opt into this.

It does not matter which clients appear to be unaffected by such a change - not all of them are visible, and it's against the spirit of the spec and process to force a change upon people they did not ask for.

Reviewer 4: An unstable prefix is only needed if the proposal is implemented before it makes it into the spec.

But this raises an interesting point in how we would handle clients that do depend on the fallback being present.  Do we create a new room version and say that prior room versions have replies that include fallbacks, and future room versions don't?  Or do we say that this change applies everywhere, and if your client is now broken, then too bad.

On the other hand, I wonder how badly a client could break due to a lack of fallback.  Clients should handle spec violations in incoming messages gracefully -- if, for example, a client crashes when it receives a reply without a fallback, that would certainly be a security issue for the client.  The worst breakage that I can imagine that wouldn't be classified as a security issue is that the client just fails to render that one message entirely which, IMHO, doesn't sound that terrible (especially as I would be very surprised if any client did break, and if any did break, it would likely be a trivial fix).

Author: > But this raises an interesting point in how we would handle clients that do depend on the fallback being present.

Since most clients ignore room versions, those clients that break on fallbacks probably also break, when this is only changed in a new room version. In my opinion any client that actually relies on the fallback being present, has issues anyway. Especially if you consider that, while the spec requires a fallback, it doesn't require you to use a specific fallback format. To quote:

> The formatted_body should use the following template:

"Should" is not a requirement. A client is free to use an empty string as the fallback, which is equal to no fallback, if I interpret the spec maliciously.

Stripping is specified similarly:

> To strip the fallback on the formatted_body, the client should remove the entirety of the mx-reply tag.

This does not specify, what the client should do, if the fallback does not contain an mx-reply tag, but removing something, that does not exist, should not cause issues, should it? ;p

The only thing actually required and what may break clients is the html requirement. Because the required fallback is not required to look different from an empty string.

But that's just me being cheeky, I guess...

Reviewer 5: To add on, there are already some clients which don't send a reply fallback at all and most clients fetch the original event and render it just fine

Reviewer 6: Right, so basically clients already get tested on resilience to missing fallbacks simply by the fact that there are quite a few clients not sending fallbacks with the replies as of right now.

I'm not quite sure which kind of unknown we're trying to protect against here by namespacing such events (even tentatively) - but for now the clause is there so this thread can be resolved, I guess?

they are somewhat badly specified. While the fallback and html use are required,
the spec only says how a fallback "should" look, not how it "must" look. In
practice there are various variations of the fallback floating around, where the
tame ones are just localized, but others are just straight up missing suggested
links or tags.

Basically a client can't rely on the fallback being present currently or it
folllowing any kind of shape or form.

#### Replies leak history

A reply includes the `body` of another event. This means a reply to an event can
leak data to users, that joined this room at a later point, but shouldn't be
able to see the event because of visibility rules or encryption. While this
isn't a big issue, there is still an issue about it: https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/issues/1654

Replies are also sometimes localized. In those cases they leak the users
language selection for their client, which may be personal information.

#### Low value of fallbacks

The above issues would be somewhat acceptable, if reply fallbacks would provide
some value to clients. Generally they don't though. The Qt html renderer breaks

> on `<mx-reply>` tags, so you need to strip them anyway to render replies.

Reviewer 6: I'm not sure where you're getting this from but Quaternion has been carrying showing replies for quite some time without any special code, so in a way it actually benefited from having the (HTML) fallback. With that said, I agree that downsides of having the replied to text verbatim in the replies outweigh the advantages of doing nothing in more basic clients. What could at least be done is leaving just the link to the previous reply (and "In reply to @mxid" in the plaintext fallback), so that only metadata from the replied to message are reused.

Author: I remember having to strip the mx-reply tags, because otherwise either Nheko or my Sailfish client did not render messages with replies at all, but now that you mention it, it may have been caused somewhere else and it may not have been Qt, that was the issue. I'll probably remove that point or at least the "breaking Qt" reference.

Author: Yes, I remembered it wrong, it was an unrelated issue, that happened with every reply fallback, but was just plain buggy code. I'll remove that part.

support encryption.

As a result of this, you would be able to reply with an image or edit a video.
New clients would also be able to implement edits and replies more easily, as
they can sidestep a lot of pitfalls.

## Potential issues

Obviously you can't remove the fallback from old events. As such clients would
still need to do something with them in the near future. I'd say just not
handling them in a special way should be okay after some unspecified period of
time.

Clients not implementing rich replies or edits may show some slightly more
confusing messages to users as well. I'd argue though that in most cases, the
reply is close enough to the replied to message, that you would be able to guess
the correct context. Replies would also be somewhat easier to implement and
worst case, a client could very easily implement a little "this is a reply"
marker to at least mark replies visually.

Same applies to edits. If 2 very similar messages appear after one another,
someone new to online messaging would assume, this is a correction to the
previous message. That may even be more obvious to them than if the message was

> prefixed with a `*`, since that has been confusing to users in the past. Since

Reviewer 6: I'd say it's rather opinionated - I myself used to recognise `*` as a signifier of an edit pretty early when they started to show in payloads (and before I got to the rich replies MSC), and I know quite a few occasions outside of Matrix where prepending `*` conventionally (if not formally) meant a correction.

Author: I do agree, that it is opinionated, but as a Nheko dev, I do get questions about the "duplicated messages with a * in front of it" pretty often, so it certainly is not universally understood in my experience.

Author: I removed the proposal for edits for now.

## Alternatives

[MSC2589](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2589): This adds the
reply text as an addional key. While this solves the parsing issues, it
doesn't address the other issues with fallbacks.

One could also just stick with the current fallbacks and make all clients pay
the cost for a small number of clients actually benefitting from them.

## Security considerations

Removing the fallback from the spec may lead to issues, when clients experience
the fallback in old events. This should not add any security issues the
client didn't already have from interpreting untrusted html, though. In all
other cases this should **reduce** security issues.

## Appendix A: Clients not supporting rich replies

Of the 18 clients listed in the [matrix client matrix](https://matrix.org/client-matrix)
10 are listed as not supporting replies:

- weechat-matrix: Actually has an [implementation](https://github.com/poljar/weechat-matrix/issues/86) to send replies although it may be [broken](https://github.com/poljar/weechat-matrix/issues/233). Doesn't render rich replies. Hard to implement because of the single socket implementation, but may be easier in the Rust version.

> - Quaternion: [Blocked because of fallbacks](https://github.com/quotient-im/libQuotient/issues/245).

Reviewer 6: It's not exactly blocked - it's just that I have a fever every time I think of implementing all those stripping things. In fact, for HTML it's getting rather easy with the recent proceedings in Quaternion; but cutting parts of the plain texts is something my users are likely to be very vocal against, next to me. Also, it's worth noting that non-compliant replies (without fallbacks, i.e., "as if" this MSC has been merged) can be sent even with the current libQuotient version.

> # MSC2781: Deprecate fallbacks in the specification

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# MSC2781: Deprecate edit & reply fallbacks in the specification
```

unless the client also already supports event links.

#### Fallback discussion blocks new features

On any proposal that wants to enable replies to other events or replies with
other events, the discussion around "how to handle the fallback" happens. Any
such MSC needs to specify, how the fallback should look like and the events need
to support the `formatted_body` field. This blocks a lot of improvements, that
could be done to replies as a whole. Often commentors even ask for the issues
with fallbacks to be fixed on that MSC.

#### Localization

Since the fallback is added as normal text into the message, it needs to be
localized for the receiving party to understand it. This however proves to be a
challenge, since users may switch languages freely in a room and it is not easy
to guess, which language was used in a short message. One could also use the
client's language, but that leaks the user's localization settings, which can be a
privacy concern and the other party may not speak that language. Alternatively a
client can just send english fallbacks, but that significantly worsens the
experience for casual users in non-english speaking countries.

> ## Proposal

Reviewer: it's a little unfortunate that the proposal is 123 lines later - can we bump the proposal content up and (re)write the arguments from above to benefit the proposal rather than combat the issues themselves?

Author: I have moved the proposal up and tried to make the language for the issues a bit nicer, but I still kept it as a list of issues, because I think that is easier to understand. I'll see if I can work in the benefits of dropping the fallback into the proposal a bit more.

> Deprecate the rich reply fallback. Clients should stop sending them and should

Reviewer: Any particular reason to choose deprecation over removal? Typically we do require a deprecation first, but considering clients will have access to older versions of the specification and this doesn't affect endpoints (just events), I'd be inclined to just stop sending it entirely.

In limited testing, Element Web seems perfectly okay with this change. In effect, MSC3440 is already planning to use replies such that there is no fallback proposed but still using the reply key. 

This argument also applies to edits.

Author: No, there isn't really any, I just worded it badly. Removal probably explains the content of the proposal better.

[MSC2589](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2589): This adds the
reply text as an addional key. While this solves the parsing issues, it
doesn't address the other issues with fallbacks.

One could also just stick with the current fallbacks and make all clients pay
the cost for a small number of clients actually benefitting from them.

Lastly one could introduce an alternative relation type for replies without
fallback and deprecate the current relation type (since it does not fit the new
format for relations anyway). We could specify, that the server is supposed to
send the replied_to event in unsigned to the client, so that clients just need
to stitch those two events together, but don't need to fetch the replied_to
event from the server. It would make replies slightly harder to implement for
clients, but it would be simpler than what this MSC proposes.

## Security considerations

Removing the fallback from the spec may lead to issues, when clients experience
the fallback in old events. This should not add any security issues the
client didn't already have from interpreting untrusted html, though. In all
other cases this should **reduce** security issues.

> ## Appendix A: Clients not supporting rich replies

Reviewer: I suspect/hope this needs updating.

Author: Well, I at least need to add all the new clients, which might shift the balance, but otherwise I fear not by much.

Author: I did update it, but it seems to have gotten worse imo, but I appreciate that fractal merged support for rich replies a few hours ago at least!

# MSC2781: Remove reply fallbacks from the specification

Currently replies require clients to send and parse a fallback representation of
the replied to message. Something similar is planned for edits. While at least
in theory fallbacks should make it simpler to start supporting replies in a new
client, they actually introduce a lot of complexity and implementation issues
and block a few valuable features. This MSC proposes to deprecate and eventually
remove those fallbacks. It is an alternative to
[MSC2589](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2589), which intends to

> double down on fallbacks.

Reviewer: MSC2589 does fallbacks differently - not sure it's fair to say it is "doubling down".

Also, it's closed in favour of this MSC so hopefully the vote of confidence it cast is reflected by this MSC :)

## Proposal

> Remove the rich reply fallback from the specification. Clients should stop

Reviewer: link to current spec please

sending them and should consider treating `<mx-reply>` parts as either something
to be unconditionally stripped or as something to be escaped as invalid html.
Clients may send replies without a formatted_body now using arbitrary message
events (not state events).

> As a result of this, you would be able to reply with an image.  New clients
> would also be able to implement edits and replies more easily, as they can
> sidestep a lot of pitfalls. This should improve the look and feel of replies in
> Matrix across all clients in the long term.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a result of this, you would be able to reply with an image.  New clients
would also be able to implement edits and replies more easily, as they can
sidestep a lot of pitfalls. 

Given clients have had enough time to implement replies completely, the
overall look & feel of replies should be unchanged or even improved by this
proposal.
```

An extended motivation is provided at [the end of this document](#user-content-appendix-b-issues-with-the-current-fallbacks).

There are similar benefits to not adding a fallback to edits. This proposal
focuses on replies for simplicity, but encourages
[MSC2676](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2676) to drop the edit
fallback or remove it [when moving to extensible

> events](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/3644).

Reviewer: This should be a comment thread on that MSC, not a statement in here.

## Potential issues

Obviously you can't remove the fallback from old events. As such clients would
still need to do something with them in the near future. I'd say just not
handling them in a special way should be okay after some unspecified period of
time.

Clients not implementing rich replies or edits may show some slightly more
confusing messages to users as well. I'd argue though that in most cases, the
reply is close enough to the replied to message, that you would be able to guess
the correct context. Replies would also be somewhat easier to implement and
worst case, a client could very easily implement a little "this is a reply"

> marker to at least mark replies visually.

Reviewer: It might also be worthwhile to lean into the pressure that not supporting replies creates. Clients which haven't supported replies up until now might need a bit of a push :)

Users complaining about lost context is one way of doing that.

~~Same applies to edits. If 2 very similar messages appear after one another,
someone new to online messaging would assume, this is a correction to the
previous message. That may even be more obvious to them than if the message was
prefixed with a `*`, since that has been confusing to users in the past. Since
edits would now look exactly like a normal message, they would also be
considerably easier to implement, since you just need to replace the former

> message now, similar to a redaction, and not merge `content` and `new_content`.~~

Reviewer: remove this if it's crossed out?

## Alternatives

[MSC2589](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2589): This adds the
reply text as an addional key. While this solves the parsing issues, it
doesn't address the other issues with fallbacks.

One could also just stick with the current fallbacks and make all clients pay
the cost for a small number of clients actually benefitting from them.

Lastly one could introduce an alternative relation type for replies without
fallback and deprecate the current relation type (since it does not fit the new

> format for relations anyway). We could specify, that the server is supposed to

Reviewer: "new format for relations" needs a link. Replies are unchanged even by the relationship MSCs, which means we have two relation formats.

send the replied_to event in unsigned to the client, so that clients just need
to stitch those two events together, but don't need to fetch the replied_to
event from the server. It would make replies slightly harder to implement for
clients, but it would be simpler than what this MSC proposes.

## Security considerations

Removing the fallback from the spec may lead to issues, when clients experience
the fallback in old events. This should not add any security issues the
client didn't already have from interpreting untrusted html, though. In all

> other cases this should **reduce** security issues.

Reviewer: This needs backing up with words - what sorts of security issues are mitigated?

Author: I linked one of them, a few more are in the appendix B, although one could argue if they are security issues or just glitches.

> ## Appendix A: Clients not supporting rich replies

Reviewer: Instead of listing the clients which don't support it, it might be best to show which clients are okay with this change on a technical level. For example, Element Web doesn't seem to care if the fallback is present or not, which is a good sign for this MSC's acceptance.

Author: I've added a section on this now with the different clients I tested. I would also be surprised if any client breaks, because then this would have been abused in the wild for a while already.

reply rendering and if dropping the reply fallback would be an issue for them.

Changes from 1.5 years ago:

- Fractal: [Seems to support replies now!](https://gitlab.gnome.org/GNOME/fractal/-/merge_requests/941)
- Commune: Seems to support rich reply rendering and style them very nicely.
- NeoChat: [Supports rich replies](https://invent.kde.org/network/neochat/-/blob/master/src/utils.h#L21)
- Cinny: [Seems to support rich replies](https://github.com/ajbura/cinny/blob/6ff339b552e242f6233abd86768bb2373b150f77/src/app/molecules/message/Message.jsx#L111)
- gomuks: [Strips the reply fallback](https://github.com/tulir/gomuks/blob/3510d223b2d765572bf2e97222f2f55d099119f0/ui/messages/html/parser.go#L361)
- Lots of other new clients!

## Appendix B: Issues with the current fallbacks

This section was moved to the back of this MSC, because it is fairly long and
exhaustive. It lists all the issues the proposal author personally experienced
with fallbacks in their client and its interactions with the ecosystem.

### Stripping the fallback

To reply to a reply, a client needs to strip the existing fallback of the first

> reply. Otherwise replies will just infinitely nest replies. [While the spec doesn't necessarily require that](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/issues/1541),

Reviewer: wrong issue? That link is talking about doing an MSC2589 approach, not nested replies.

Author: I linked to the spec, that says only to strip the fallback when displaying a message now.

not doing so risks running into the event size limit, but more importantly, it
just leads to a bad experience for clients actually relying on the fallback.

Stripping the fallback is not trivial. Multiple implementations had bugs in
their fallback stripping logic. The edge cases are not covered in the
specification in detail and some clients have interpreted them differently.
Common mistakes include:

- Not stripping the fallback in body, which leads to a very long nested chain.
- Not dealing with mismatched `<mx-reply>` tags, which can look like you were
    impersonating someone.

Stripping the fallback from body is even more complicated, since there is no way

> to distinguish a quote from a reply reliably.

Reviewer: This is false. The spec outlines exactly how the plain text parsing and stripping works - this is easily distinguished between a reply and a quote.

Even if the first line of the reply is a quote, it is easily detected and accounted for under the spec's algorithm.

Author: The algorithm is only reliable, if there is always a fallback in the message and especially not in the current version of the spec, since the new spec layout seems to strip spaces:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/16312324/150047161-5bea96fe-dc33-4e32-b777-7d98a83bff82.png)

(from https://spec.matrix.org/v1.1/client-server-api/#fallback-for-mtext-mnotice-and-unrecognised-message-types)

There is no way to distinguish there if "this is the second line" is from the fallback or not. The proper algorithm is to check, if a message starts with `> <@` and then strip until the next empty line and always include an empty line after the fallback after sending the message. This is not explicit in the spec and failing to do so causes ambiguities.

Similarly for the formatted body, the spec only says this: `To strip the fallback on the formatted_body, the client should remove the entirety of the mx-reply tag.`

A client should actually strip using the regex `<mx-reply>.*</mx-reply>`, because otherwise there is a way for the sender of the original event to control the content of the replies to event by inserting a second `</mx-reply>` and an unmatched comment tag.

Reviewer: That screenshot is clearly a rendering fail from the new structure and not normative content.

https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/blob/6c4aabd05348a7fb7ed3135e79ea7013c3ac9297/content/client-server-api/modules/instant_messaging.md?plain=1#L359-L361

^ this is the representation. There must be a blank line between the fallback and the start of the message.

As for the HTML: the wording chosen by the spec is correct. It's asking to remove the tag, not the text. This is a very subtle difference which implies HTML parsing needs to take place before removing the tag contents. HTML parsers will take care of invalid structures.

Author: The problem with html parsers applying before removing the tag, is that invalid tags don't get removed. So any client implementing that, can be fooled by mismatched `<mx-reply>` tags. I forget the exact exploit, but it allowed you to insert text into the replied to message by inserting additional, unmatched mx-reply tags, because html would autoclose them. So you had hidden text in the original message, that suddenly became visible in the reply someone sent.

But I guess you are right, the stripping issue for the body tag only applies, if someone does not send a reply fallback in body or there is a missing empty line. (As long as the spec rendered correctly for the user implementing it of course)

Author: Reworded the plain body stripping now to the common mistakes now, which all get solved, if you don't need to strip it. I also didn't mention, that the current spec renders the fallback in such a way, that it makes client implement it wrong. :3

### Creating a new fallback

To create a new fallback, a client needs to add untrusted html to its own
events. This is an easy attack vector to inject your own content into someone
elses reply. While this can be prevented with enough care, since Riot basically
had to fix this issue twice, it can be expected that other clients can also be
affected by this.

### Requirement of html for replies

The spec requires rich replies to have a fallback using html:

> Rich replies MUST have a format of org.matrix.custom.html and therefore a formatted_body alongside the body and appropriate msgtype.

This means you can't reply using only a `body` and you can't reply with an
image, since those don't have a `formatted_body` property currently. This means
a text only client, that doesn't want to display html, still needs to support
html anyway and that new features are blocked, because of fallbacks.

This is also an issue with edits, where the combination of edit fallback and
reply fallback is somewhat interesting: You need to send a fallback, since the
event is still a reply, but you can't send a reply relation, since this is an

> edit. Currently this is solved by not sending a reply fallback in edits, so

Reviewer: replies and edits are able to co-exist under their relation formats.

Author: This is at least not intended by the MSC according to my interpretation of the proposal text: https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2676/files#diff-1761bdadd1caacb2503d2b2e6c572fc628c7321b0beab8d502ac249c15b2826aR113

It explicitly talks about reference relations in the proposal (which were originally intended to replace the current replies by the author, I believe?) and it says there should be no fallback and it doesn't mention sending an `m.in_reply_to` in the edit. So if they can co-exist is probably something to be solved on that proposal, but according to my current reading, they can't or it is at least not intended.

Reviewer: `m.replace` should be removed from the edits MSC as `m.replace` is its own MSC now, and in either case it's not this MSC's role to talk about edits - leave that to the edits MSC please.

Author: I moved this to a single sentence talking about the interaction with other MSCs now. I think having some reference to that issue is still valueable.

clients can't rely on a reply fallback in all cases.

We currently can see 2 behaviours in practice:

Client A supports rich reply rendering, Client B does not.

- A sends an edit. This according to MSC2676 does not include a reply fallback.
    A properly sees the edit still as a reply. B does not.
- B sends an edit but includes a reply fallback in the body. It can still see
    that the message is a reply. A needs to strip the invalid reply fallback, or
    it will see the reply content twice.

### Format is unreliable

Further complicating the stripping and creation portion of fallbacks is, that
they are somewhat badly specified. While the fallback and html use are required,
the spec only says how a fallback "should" look, not how it "must" look. In
practice there are various variations of the fallback floating around, where the
tame ones are just localized, but others are just straight up missing suggested
links or tags.

Basically a client can't rely on the fallback being present currently or it
following any kind of shape or form and stripping is done on a best effort

> basis, especially for the fallback in `body`.

Reviewer: This section feels overly rant-y. The more likely story is that the fallback is complicated to get right and so clients end up implementing their own thing by accident, introducing inconsistencies. The `should` is a strong recommendation from the spec and clients don't really have a reason to deviate from it - so it is effectively a `must` until a proper use-case is defined that warrants a customized format.

Author: I have seen multiple deviations from that format already, where clients didn't use the mxid in the fallback, but the userid. Some clients translated the format, some always send the body in the fallback instead of "sent a file". Those events are sent by clients and do cause issues. I'm not sure how I should word that otherwise? I'll remove the first 1.5 sentences though.

Reviewer: Rewording the section to talk about how complicated it is to get the fallback correct (by example of no one being consistent) feels more appropriate.

Author: I've reworded it slightly now to give more focus on common variations instead of specifically focussing on issues with stripping.

### Replies leak history

A reply includes the `body` of another event. This means a reply to an event can
leak data to users, that joined this room at a later point, but shouldn't be
able to see the event because of visibility rules or encryption. While this
isn't a big issue, there is still an issue about it: https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/issues/1654

Replies are also sometimes localized. In those cases they leak the users

> language selection for their client, which may be personal information.

Reviewer: This is going back to my last comment about how clients just got it wrong and have bugs.

Author: Localizing the reply fallback is not trivial, so I think it makes sense to at least mention it.

Reviewer: well, you're not meant to localize it :D 

It's a client bug if it is translated/localized.

Author: Should I just add, that the requirement for not localizing the fallback was not enough to stop clients from doing so? Also, where exactly does the spec say that? Just because the requirement only has an English text, doesn't seem to be enough for a developer to understand, that it shouldn't be translated. But at least tulir removed the translations from Element Android at some point, so clients translating the fallback are probably rare nowadays: https://github.com/vector-im/element-android/pull/1610

Author: Changed this now to say, that historically some clients did this wrong. But I still think the spec isn't clear enough in that regard.

### Using the unmodified fallback in clients and bridges

> The above issues are minor, if reply fallbacks would sufficiend value to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The above issues are minor, if reply fallbacks added sufficient value to
```

clients.  Bridges usually try to bridge to native replies, so they need to
strip the reply fallback
(https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/issues/1541). Even the IRC bridge
seems to send a custom fallback, because the default fallback is not that

> welcome to the IRC crowd.

Reviewer: Bridges are not required to be 1:1 mappings of Matrix messages, nor are they ever intended to be perfect mappings. IRC is not Matrix, so I don't think this argument is valid.

Author: The IRC bridge has often be mentioned to me as a good candidate for using the reply fallback. I wanted to preempt that comment thread on the MSC, because it is wrong.

Reviewer: The IRC bridge is implementing a different kind of reply fallback though, so isn't supporting the argument of the paragraphs here.

Author: It supports the point, that the fallback isn't very useful, since you need to replace it anyway to have an experience, that users will accept (which is what the section is about).

Reviewer: That's not really clear to me - can those words be added? 😇

Author: Sure, I removed them before, because they sounded mean.

Author: Added an extra sentence now.

Some clients do choose not to implement rich reply rendering, but the experience
tends to not be ideal, especially in cases where you reply to an image and now
the user needs to guess, what image was being replied to.

As a result the fallbacks provide value to only a subset of the Matrix
ecosystem.

### Fallback increase integration work with new features

- [Edits explicitly mention](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2676)
    that a reply fallback should not be sent in the `m.new_content`.
- [Extensible events](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/1767) would
    need to specify how the fallback should look like. [Alternatively they could

>     also drop it](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/3644).

Reviewer: MSC1767 isn't going to touch fallbacks or replies at all. That's 100% MSC3644's job.

Author: It might have been a little confusing, but I just wanted to link to what extensible events are, I'll see if I can make that clearer.

Author: Is this now clearer?

Reviewer: not really, but it's not my most major concern - resolving for now as the wording is at least different.

### Localization

Since the fallback is added as normal text into the message, it needs to be

> localized for the receiving party to understand it. This however proves to be a

Reviewer: The spec explicitly does not want it translated. This is a client bug.

## Potential issues

Obviously you can't remove the fallback from old events. As such clients would
still need to do something with them in the near future. I'd say just not
handling them in a special way should be okay after some unspecified period of
time.

Clients not implementing rich replies or edits may show some slightly more
confusing messages to users as well. I'd argue though that in most cases, the
reply is close enough to the replied to message, that you would be able to guess
the correct context. Replies would also be somewhat easier to implement and
worst case, a client could very easily implement a little "this is a reply"
marker to at least mark replies visually. Not having a reply fallback might also
prompt some clients to implement support for rich replies sooner. Users will now
complain about no context. Previously there was some context for replies to text
messages, which made it easy to accept the solution as good enough. However the
experience with replies to images was not acceptable. Motivating clients to
implement rich replies is a good thing in the long run and will improve the
Matrix experience overall.

> You might not get notifications anymore for replies to your messages. This was

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
You might not get notifications any more for replies to your messages. This was
```

a feature of the reply fallback, because it included the username, but users had
no control over it. A follow-up MSC will propose a push rule for related events,
which will allow users control over getting notified by replies (and other

> relations) or not.

Reviewer 7: changing the push rules is a big undertaking, so won't happen quickly. I think if we accept this MSC, we should do so on the understanding that we're prepared to lose notifications for replies for an indefinite period. If we're *not* happy with that, we should at least satisfy ourselves that changing the push rules is *possible* first.

Author: I'm pretty sure it is possible, here is how beeper did the same for reactions: https://gitlab.com/beeper/synapse/-/commit/44a1728b6b021f97900c89e0c00f7d1a23ce0d43

The MSC I want to write will have that, just with a way to match on the relation type and a special case for the reply relation format.

Reviewer 7: > I'm pretty sure it is possible, here is how beeper did the same for reactions: https://gitlab.com/beeper/synapse/-/commit/44a1728b6b021f97900c89e0c00f7d1a23ce0d43

it's hard for me to reverse-engineer how exactly the push rules are changing here, and how clients are expected to behave in the face of such changes. I'd want to see a more complete analysis.

Reviewer 8: relying on reply fallbacks to notify you when someone replies to your message is a hack. my hunch is that people aren't even necessarily aware that it exists as an (accidental) feature. i'm okay with removing it in order to clean up reply fallbacks as long as we add it back in on push rules - whether it's easy or hard to incorporate it in push rules.

Author: @richvdh I'll just write the MSC on saturday and then you can form an opinion. But basically it is an extra condition, that can match on a related event, which can be useful in general to enable/disable notifications for replies, reactions, threads, edits, etc.

Reviewer 7: > relying on reply fallbacks to notify you when someone replies to your message is a hack. my hunch is that people aren't even necessarily aware that it exists as an (accidental) feature. 

I agree with both, but I'm pretty sure that people would notice it going missing as an (accidental) feature.

> i'm okay with removing it in order to clean up reply fallbacks as long as we add it back in on push rules - whether it's easy or hard to incorporate it in push rules.

... so, we're agreed we need a proposal for doing so before we accept this MSC?  I'm sorry, I've been burnt here before.

Author: "weekend": https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/3664

Reviewer 9: I rely heavily on getting binged when someone replies to a message, and you can see that it has become ingrained in behaviour as people generally don't start replies with a bing. I personally think we really should fix the push rules before we drop fallbacks.

Reviewer 7: resolving this thread now that we have #3664.

- Pattle: Client is not being developed anymore.
- Seaglass: Doesn't support rich replies, but is [unhappy with how the fallback looks](https://github.com/neilalexander/seaglass/issues/51)?
- Miitrix: Somewhat unlikely to support it, I guess?
- matrix-commander: No idea, but doesn't look like it.
- gotktrix: [Seems to rely on the reply fallback](https://github.com/diamondburned/gotktrix/blob/5f2783d633560421746a82aab71d4f7421e4b99c/internal/app/messageview/message/mcontent/text/html.go#L437)
- Hydrogen: [Seems to use the reply fallback](https://github.com/vector-im/hydrogen-web/blob/c3177b06bf9f760aac2bfd5039342422b7ec8bb4/doc/impl-thoughts/PENDING_REPLIES.md)
- kazv: Doesn't seem to support replies at all
- Syphon: [Uses the reply fallback in body](https://github.com/syphon-org/syphon/blob/fa44c5abe37bdd256a9cb61cbc8552e0e539cdce/lib/views/widgets/messages/message.dart#L368)

So in summary, 3/4 of the listed clients don't support replies. At least one
client doesn't support it because of the fallback (Quaternion). 3 of the command
line clients probably won't support replies, since they don't support formatted
messages and replies require html support for at least sending.

> Only one client implemented rich replies in the last 1.5 years. Other clients

Reviewer 7: what date was this written?

Author: I've added a date to the top of the status section now, when it was last updated.

are either new in my list or didn't change their reply rendering. I would
appreciate to hear, why those client developers decided not to support rich
reply rendering and if dropping the reply fallback would be an issue for them.

> Changes from 1.5 years ago:

Reviewer 7: please could you replace this with an actual date?

Author: I've added a date instead of replacing it, because I think the time period is the interesting thing here, but it should be clear now, what time period is meant.

Reviewer 7: thanks.

- Fractal: [Seems to support replies now!](https://gitlab.gnome.org/GNOME/fractal/-/merge_requests/941)
- Commune: Seems to support rich reply rendering and style them very nicely.
- NeoChat: [Supports rich replies](https://invent.kde.org/network/neochat/-/blob/master/src/utils.h#L21)
- Cinny: [Seems to support rich replies](https://github.com/ajbura/cinny/blob/6ff339b552e242f6233abd86768bb2373b150f77/src/app/molecules/message/Message.jsx#L111)
- gomuks: [Strips the reply fallback](https://github.com/tulir/gomuks/blob/3510d223b2d765572bf2e97222f2f55d099119f0/ui/messages/html/parser.go#L361)
- Lots of other new clients!

> ### Testresults without fallback

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
### Results of testing replies without fallback
```

Historically clients have also sometimes localized the fallbacks. In those cases
they leak the users language selection for their client, which may be personal
information.

### Using the unmodified fallback in clients and bridges

The above issues are minor, if reply fallbacks added sufficient value to
clients.  Bridges usually try to bridge to native replies, so they need to
strip the reply fallback
(https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/issues/1541). Even the IRC bridge
seems to send a custom fallback, because the default fallback is not that
welcome to the IRC crowd, although the use cases for simple, text only bridges
is often touted as a good usecase for the fallback (sometimes even explicitly
mentioning bridging to IRC). As a result there are very few bridges, that
benefit from the fallback being present.

Some clients do choose not to implement rich reply rendering, but the experience
tends to not be ideal, especially in cases where you reply to an image and now
the user needs to guess, what image was being replied to.

As a result the fallbacks provide value to only a subset of the Matrix
ecosystem.

> ### Fallback increase integration work with new features

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
### Fallbacks increase integration work with new features
```

# MSC2781: Remove reply fallbacks from the specification

> Currently replies require clients to send and parse a fallback representation
> of the replied to message. While at least in theory fallbacks should make it
> simpler to start supporting replies in a new client, they actually introduce a
> lot of complexity and implementation issues and block a few valuable features.
> This MSC proposes to deprecate and eventually remove those fallbacks. It was an
> alternative to [MSC2589](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2589),
> which chose a different representation of the reply fallback, but was
> ultimately closed in favor of this proposal.

Reviewer 10: MSC2589 is noted in the alternative section, which seems to fit it a bit better. I simplified the text slightly, but I'm unconvinced it is clearer. Additionally I added more context into the issues that this causes to better setup why we want to remove this

```suggestion
Currently replies require clients to send and parse a [fallback representation](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.10/client-server-api/#fallbacks-for-rich-replies)
of the replied to message. Fallback representation is meant to simplify supporting
replies in a new client, but they actually create implementation issues and block features.
This MSC proposes to deprecate and eventually remove those fallbacks.

Some of the known issues include:

* The content of reply fallback is [untrusted](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.10/client-server-api/#stripping-the-fallback).
* Reply fallbacks may leak history. ([#368](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec/issues/368))
* Parsing reply fallbacks can be tricky. ([#350](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec/issues/350))
* It is unclear how to handle a reply to a reply. ([#372](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec/issues/372))
* Localization of replies is not possible when the content is embedded into the event.
* It is not possible to fully redact an event once it is replied to, this causes both trust & safety and right to be forgotten issues.
* There are a variety of implementation bugs related to reply fallback handling.
```

Author: I mostly applied this diff with a few minor wording changes. Feel free to send further suggestions about that section, but I will mark this as resolved for now for clarity!

## Proposal

> Remove the [rich reply fallback from the

Reviewer: Blocking concern for FCP finish: I don't think we can jump to removal, but we can deprecate and say "Clients SHOULD NOT send fallback", for example. A later MSC would be capable of fully removing the fallback. 

The spec would read something like:

> Clients SHOULD NOT send fallback representation, but SHOULD attempt to parse it intelligently when provided (detected by the presence of `<mx-reply />`). The fallback representation is as follows: [...]

Later, when removed and clients have had a chance to fully see the transition, an MSC to remove the fallback completely can be FCP'd. The spec after that change would likely just be a note block saying "There used to be a fallback representation, but not anymore. Click [here] to see it.".

This is all as required under the deprecation policy: https://spec.matrix.org/v1.10/#deprecation-policy

Author: I disagree, that a separate deprecation period is necessary. The behaviour was already made optional since version 1.3. As such clients should already be able to deal with not receiving a fallback. For that reason I think just mentioning the change in an INFO box should be sufficient.

For receiving clients there is no difference between a client, that stops sending a fallback because of a "SHOULD NOT" or the spec not mentioning that clients should or should not send a fallback at all. For the sending client this only adds confusion without any substantial benefit imo.

Also on the receiving end missing fallbacks need to be supported already today (since 1.3). As such there isn't really a change in behaviour, just the frequency of such events. Again, pointing out the change in an INFO box would be helpful, but a deprecation period would just add additional process overhead.

So to summarize, I don't think the deprecation policy applies here and to respect the time of everyone involved, I deem an additional MSC to then remove the behaviour as unnecessary. The actual implementation in the specification might be a bit more sophisticated, but I do believe sending reply fallbacks should be removed now.

Reviewer 11: I think you may be talking about two slightly different things here: it's a given that clients need to support them not being there. The question is whether the text of the next few versions of the spec needs to describe a thing that was previously in it but is now no longer recommended.

Author: @dbkr I think the spec should stop suggesting that reply fallbacks are used in replies. I think that should just be historical information as we do for historical mxids, m.room.aliases rX.Y.Z spec versions and unamespaced tags for example, since those can still appear and client authors need to be aware of that. I don't think any of those had a deprecation period either and some of those are arguably higher impact.

Reviewer: All of those examples are from a time before the deprecation policy was enacted in Matrix 1.1, fwiw. This MSC introduces a technically breaking change to clients, which necessitates deprecation first at a minimum. The spec instructs clients which do support rich replies on how to handle the fallback (strip it), and implies that the module is optional. By removing the fallback, we're saying that clients *must* support rich replies in order to maintain conversation context - something which is currently optional (and not even a `SHOULD` optional).

The MSC addresses the context piece a bit, but doesn't address the breaking change. As such, this needs to go through deprecation first to manage the breaking change, then removal at least 1 version later as per the policy. This does add additional overhead - feedback regarding that is best placed in a dedicated MSC which aims to change the deprecation policy.

Author: > All of those examples are from a time before the deprecation policy was enacted in Matrix 1.1, fwiw. This MSC introduces a technically breaking change to clients, which necessitates deprecation first at a minimum. The spec instructs clients which do support rich replies on how to handle the fallback (strip it), and implies that the module is optional. By removing the fallback, we're saying that clients must support rich replies in order to maintain conversation context - something which is currently optional (and not even a SHOULD optional).

No, currently it is perfectly legal for a client to never send reply fallbacks, since reply fallbacks were made optional in Matrix 1.3. This MSC just removes the case, where sometimes clients without rich replies weren't losing context, because most clients still send a fallback today. But since the reply fallback was already optional, no client was required to send a reply fallback. And other features like threads or edits never included a reply fallback apart from some clients implementing that feature incorrectly. As such this is only breaking because it increases the likelihood of encountering an event without reply fallback, but it doesn't change that such events are perfectly legal to send already.

This MSC only removes already optional behaviour.

Reviewer 12: > This MSC introduces a technically breaking change to clients

..but it doesn't. Clients have to handle the fallback not being there. It does not meet the bar for a "breaking change".

I would **strongly** advocate a nuanced approach here, on a case-by-case basis (which honestly isn't hard given the amount of attention MSCs get). In _this particular case_, because the functionality was optional, there is little benefit to dragging this process out any longer than needed, particularly given the security impacts of reply fallbacks. Having them in the ecosystem any longer than necessary is just untenable, _especially_ if it's just due to bureaucracy rather than any technical/security/social reasons.

Reviewer: This feels like it's become a circular argument with no conclusion. Other members of the SCT are encouraged to weigh in on this, as I'm unconvinced that this MSC can go through as-is.

Reviewer 10: Since clients already need to handle the fallback not being there then I think it is fine to remove it with a historical reference to strip the content.

Reviewer 9: The question in my mind is: what are the benefits to the ecosystem by having a deprecation period? What would materially change if we marked these APIs as deprecated?

Naively I would have thought that the only action client authors would _need_ to take was to ensure that they handled the absence of the fallback correctly. Given its has been optional since 1.3 this *should* be a no-op for client implementers. 

However, having a deprecation policy will flag two things to client develops:
1. They really do need to make sure they correctly handle replies without fallback. There is a difference between clients theoretically supporting lack of fallback and them actually supporting it.
2. They may want to ensure that the UX without fallback is still good. This is a transition from being able to mostly be able to rely on there being a fallback most of the time, to there never being one.

Personally, I think if we're relatively confident that most clients already deal correctly with the above its OK to skip the deprecation period. I'm in no position to judge the client situation though.

Otherwise, the safest option would be to do a short deprecation period, though I would advocate for not requiring a new MSC and instead simply have this MSC say "fallback will be deprecated in the next release, and removed the release after (unless the SCT hear enough negative feedback to delay)". If push comes to shove we can always do a one-line MSC to change that.

In terms of getting this over the line, I'll try and poke internally to get a conclusion on this.

**TL;DR**: My instinct is let's skip if we're confident that the vast majority of the client ecosystem would not benefit from a deprecation period, but if not let's just do a quick deprecation period and slate the removal in this MSC.

specification](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.1/client-server-api/#fallbacks-for-rich-replies).
Clients should stop sending them and should consider treating `<mx-reply>` parts
as either something to be unconditionally stripped or as something to be escaped

> as invalid html. Clients may send replies without a formatted_body now using
> arbitrary message events (not state events), which is currently still disallowed
> by the
> [specification](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.1/client-server-api/#rich-replies).

Reviewer 10: This has been allowed since Matrix v1.3: https://spec.matrix.org/v1.10/client-server-api/#rich-replies

```suggestion
as invalid HTML.
```

> as invalid html. Clients may send replies without a formatted_body now using
> arbitrary message events (not state events), which is currently still disallowed
> by the
> [specification](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.1/client-server-api/#rich-replies).
> 
> As a result of this, you would be able to reply with an image.  New clients
> would also be able to implement edits and replies more easily, as they can
> sidestep a lot of pitfalls.

Reviewer 10: This has been allowed since Matrix v1.3: https://spec.matrix.org/v1.10/client-server-api/#rich-replies

```suggestion
as invalid HTML.
```

Given clients have had enough time to implement replies completely, the
overall look & feel of replies should be unchanged or even improved by this
proposal.

An extended motivation is provided at [the end of this document](#user-content-appendix-b-issues-with-the-current-fallbacks).

## Potential issues

> Obviously you can't remove the fallback from old events. As such clients would
> still need to do something with them in the near future. I'd say just not
> handling them in a special way should be okay after some unspecified period of
> time.

Reviewer 10: ```suggestion
For a period of time clients will need to continue handling events with reply fallbacks,
either old events or from clients which have not yet been updated.
```

> Clients not implementing rich replies or edits may show some slightly more
> confusing messages to users as well. I'd argue though that in most cases, the
> reply is close enough to the replied to message, that you would be able to guess
> the correct context. Replies would also be somewhat easier to implement and
> worst case, a client could very easily implement a little "this is a reply"
> marker to at least mark replies visually. Not having a reply fallback might also
> prompt some clients to implement support for rich replies sooner. Users will now
> complain about no context. Previously there was some context for replies to text
> messages, which made it easy to accept the solution as good enough. However the
> experience with replies to images was not acceptable. Motivating clients to
> implement rich replies is a good thing in the long run and will improve the
> Matrix experience overall.

Reviewer: I found it hard to read this paragraph in particular. Non-blocking suggested edit:
```suggestion
Clients which don't implement rich replies or edits may see messages
without context, confusing users. However, most replies and edits are
in close proximity to the original message, making context likely to be
nearby. Clients should also have enough information in the event to
render helpful indications to users while they work on full support.
```

Author: I applied this, since most of the paragraph seemed to be a bit redundant. Thanks!

You might not get notifications any more for replies to your messages. This was
a feature of the reply fallback, because it included the username, but users had
no control over it. Notifications can be added back by an MSC like
[MSC3664](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/3664) or a similar
proposal and give the user more control over the notifications while also being

> an explicit solution.

Reviewer 10: I think with intentional mentions this isn't an issue anymore, see https://spec.matrix.org/v1.7/client-server-api/#mentioning-the-replied-to-user

Author: That is partially true. Intentional mentions resolve the notification issue, however the current behaviour is also very lacking, see for example https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4142

I don't think the notification behaviour should be a blocker for this MSC and I never considered it one, considering that when I wrote this MSC, that behaviour was actually broken in Synapse. Also not all clients support intentional mentions, for those this is still a problem. That paragraph is more about mentioning that it could be solved by a different MSC.

I can update the paragraph about the current solutions, however I do expect it to grow stale quite quickly again unless the blockers mentioned above are resolved from the SCT side.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Clients which aren't using [intentional mentions](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.7/client-server-api/#mentioning-the-replied-to-user)
may cause some missed notifications on the receiving side. [MSC3664](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/3664)
and similar aim to address this issue, as [MSC4142](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4142)
tries to improve the intentional mentions experience for replies generally.
```

Reviewer: The concern blocking FCP from finishing here is text to clarify the presence of intentional mentions in the modern world. The older blockers regarding notifications/push rules are removed/negated.

Author: I updated the paragraph to specify, that since clients would probably implement intentional mentions first, the notification behaviour should not be a blocker anymore, but might be improved in the future.

fallback and deprecate the current relation type (since it does not fit the
[new format for relations](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2674)
anyway). We could specify, that the server is supposed to send the replied_to
event in unsigned to the client, so that clients just need to stitch those two
events together, but don't need to fetch the replied_to event from the server.
It would make replies slightly harder to implement for clients, but it would be
simpler than what this MSC proposes.

## Security considerations

Removing the fallback from the spec may lead to issues, when clients experience
the fallback in old events. This should not add any security issues the
client didn't already have from interpreting untrusted html, though. In all
other cases this should **reduce** security issues (see
https://github.com/vector-im/element-web/releases/tag/v1.7.3 or the appendix for
examples).

## Appendix A: Support for rich replies in different clients

### Clients without rendering support for rich replies

Of the 23 clients listed in the [matrix client matrix](https://matrix.org/clients-matrix)
16 are listed as not supporting replies (updated January 2022):

> - Element Android: Relies on the reply fallback.

Author: One of my hopes with this MSC was to encourage clients to implement proper reply support. Element Android in particular has been a problem for me, since it sends invalid fallbacks in many cases. While I do agree, that it is unlikely this will actually be fixed in Element Android, considering how problematic the reply implementation in Element Android is, I don't know if that should really be a blocker on this MSC. Stripping out its current reply handling and implement this MSC is probably easier than making Element Android actually compliant with the current specification for replies (from before this MSC).

This means you can't reply using only a `body` and you can't reply with an
image, since those don't have a `formatted_body` property currently. This means
a text only client, that doesn't want to display html, still needs to support
html anyway and that new features are blocked, because of fallbacks.

### Format is unreliable

While the spec says how a fallback "should" look, there are variations in use
which further complicates stripping the fallback or are common mistakes, when
emitting the fallback. Some variations include localizing the fallback,
missing suggested links or tags, using the body in replies to files or images
or using the display name instead of the matrix id.

As a result the experience in clients relying on the fallback or stripping the
fallback varies depending on the sending client.

### Replies leak history

A reply includes the `body` of another event. This means a reply to an event can
leak data to users, that joined this room at a later point, but shouldn't be
able to see the event because of visibility rules or encryption. While this
isn't a big issue, there is still an issue about it: https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/issues/1654

> 

Reviewer: Non-blocking, just added information from discussion with the SCT:
```suggestion

This history leak can also cause abusive or redacted messages to remain visible
to other room members, depending on the client implementation of replies.

```

Author: Added this.

    also intends to just drop the fallbacks in extensible events.

### Localization

Since the fallback is added as normal text into the message, it needs to be
localized for the receiving party to understand it. This however proves to be a
challenge, since users may switch languages freely in a room and it is not easy
to guess, which language was used in a short message. One could also use the
client's language, but that leaks the user's localization settings, which can be a
privacy concern and the other party may not speak that language. Alternatively a
client can just send english fallbacks, but that significantly worsens the
experience for casual users in non-english speaking countries. The specification
currently requires them to not be translated (although some clients don't follow
that), but not sending a fallback at all completely sidesteps the need for the
spec to specify that and clients relying on an english only fallback.

## Unstable prefix

Clients should use the prefix `im.nheko.msc2781.` for all their event types, if
they implement this MSC in a publicly available release or events may otherwise

> bleed into public rooms.

Reviewer 10: I don't think this needs an unstable prefix -- the spec says that rsending reply fallbacks is a "SHOULD", so it is valid to stop sending them.

Author: Originally the unstable prefix was added as some SCT members asked for it. However, I do agree that this seems unnecessary since 1.3 and removed it.

# MSC2781: Remove reply fallbacks from the specification

Currently the specification suggests clients should send and strip a
[fallback representation](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.10/client-server-api/#fallbacks-for-rich-replies)
of a replied to message. The fallback representation was meant to simplify
supporting replies in a new client, but in practice they add complexity, are
often implemented incorrectly and block new features.

This MSC proposes to **remove** those fallbacks from the specification.

Some of the known issues include:
* The content of reply fallback is [untrusted](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.10/client-server-api/#stripping-the-fallback).
* Reply fallbacks may leak history. ([#368](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec/issues/368))
* Parsing reply fallbacks can be tricky. ([#350](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec/issues/350))
* It is unclear how to handle a reply to a reply. ([#372](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec/issues/372))
* Localization of replies is not possible when the content is embedded into the event.

> * It is not possible to fully redact an event once it is replied to. This causes both trust & safety and right to be forgotten issues.

Reviewer: Let's not wade into legal arguments here, particularly when no one reviewing this advertises themselves as a GDPR lawyer. We can also spell out the T&S concern to remove the mystery.

```suggestion
* It is not possible to fully redact an event once it is replied to. This causes issues with Trust & Safety where
  spam or other removed content remains visible, and may cause issues with the GDPR Right to be Forgotten.
```

# MSC2781: Remove reply fallbacks from the specification

Currently the specification suggest clients should send and strip a
[fallback representation](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.10/client-server-api/#fallbacks-for-rich-replies)
of a replied to message. The fallback representation was meant to simplify
supporting replies in a new client, but in practice they add complexity, are
often implemented incorrectly and block new features.

This MSC proposes to **remove** those fallbacks from the specification.

Some of the known issues include:
* The content of reply fallback is [untrusted](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.10/client-server-api/#stripping-the-fallback).
* Reply fallbacks may leak history. ([#368](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec/issues/368))
* Parsing reply fallbacks can be tricky. ([#350](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec/issues/350))
* It is unclear how to handle a reply to a reply. ([#372](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec/issues/372))
* Localization of replies is not possible when the content is embedded into the event.

> * It is not possible to fully redact an event once it is replied to, this causes both trust & safety and right to be forgotten issues.

Reviewer 7: Grammar nit:

```suggestion
* It is not possible to fully redact an event once it is replied to. This causes both trust & safety and right to be forgotten issues.
```

* There are a variety of implementation bugs related to reply fallback handling.

More details and considerations are provided in the appendices, but these are
provided for convenience and aren't necessary to understand this proposal.

## Proposal

Remove the [rich reply fallback from the
specification](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.10/client-server-api/#fallbacks-for-rich-replies).

> Clients should stop sending them and should consider treating `<mx-reply>` parts
> as either something to be unconditionally stripped or as something to be escaped
> as invalid html.

Reviewer 10: I think it probably makes more sense to just strip it? I prefer not having "either-or" sort of things in a specification and give a single clear guidance.

```suggestion
Clients should stop sending them and should treat `<mx-reply>` elements as something
to be unconditionally stripped.
```

Author: Hm, I think unconditionally stripping them forever is a bit dangerous, since it allows you to sneak data into events, that usually isn't rendered. The "either-or" behaviour makes the old behaviour of most clients still valid, but I think long term clients shouldn't special case that tag and render it as they do any invalid html (which in Nheko's case is dump it into the message as text). However how clients treat invalid html is again different, Nheko html escapes such tags, other clients drop such tags.

Maybe this should say, that clients should just treat it as invalid html, which implicitly allows both of these implementations? And in the future someone can describe in more detail how invalid html tags should be handled in general?

Reviewer: Describing it as "invalid HTML" with a "for example, by stripping the tag or rendering the escaped plain text" I think would be fine.

Author: I simplified it to "client should treat it as any other invalid html tag", no need to spell out how clients currently do that.

Clients are not required to include a fallback in a reply since version 1.3 of
the
[specification](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.10/client-server-api/#rich-replies).

> For this reason the reply fallbck can be removed from the specification without
> any additional deprecation period.

Reviewer 10: ```suggestion
For this reason the reply fallback can be removed from the specification without
any additional deprecation period.
```

overall look & feel of replies should be unchanged or even improved by this
proposal. Implementing replies in a client should also be a bit easier with this
change.

An extended motivation is provided at [the end of this document](#user-content-appendix-b-issues-with-the-current-fallbacks).

## Potential issues

Old events and events sent by clients implementing an older version of the
Matrix specification might still contain a reply fallback. So for at least some
period of time clients will still need to strip reply fallbacks from messages.

Clients which don't implement rich replies or edits may see messages
without context, confusing users. However, most replies and edits are
in close proximity to the original message, making context likely to be
nearby. Clients should also have enough information in the event to
render helpful indications to users while they work on full support.

Clients which aren't using
[intentional mentions](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.7/client-server-api/#mentioning-the-replied-to-user)
may cause some missed notifications on the receiving side.
[MSC3664](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/3664) and similar aim to

> address this issue, as

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
address this issue, and
```

Because intentional mentions are already part of the Matrix specification since
version 1.7, clients can be expected to implement those first, which should make
the impact on notifications minimal in practice.

## Alternatives

[MSC2589](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2589): This adds the
reply text as an additional key. While this solves the parsing issues, it
doesn't address the other issues with fallbacks.

One could also just stick with the current fallbacks and make all clients pay
the cost for a small number of clients actually benefitting from them.

Lastly one could introduce an alternative relation type for replies without
fallback and deprecate the current relation type (since it does not fit the
[new format for relations](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2674)
anyway). We could specify, that the server is supposed to send the replied_to
event in unsigned to the client, so that clients just need to stitch those two
events together, but don't need to fetch the replied_to event from the server.
It would make replies slightly harder to implement for clients, but it would be
simpler than what this MSC proposes.

## Security considerations

> Removing the fallback from the spec may lead to issues, when clients experience
> the fallback in old events. This should not add any security issues the
> client didn't already have from interpreting untrusted html, though. In all
> other cases this should **reduce** security issues (see
> https://github.com/vector-im/element-web/releases/tag/v1.7.3 or the appendix for
> examples).

Reviewer 10: I think this somewhat overlaps with what we say above, let's stick to security concerns in thsi section:

```suggestion
Overall this should **reduce** security issues as the handling of untrusted
HTML is simplified. For an example security issue that could be avoided, see
https://github.com/vector-im/element-web/releases/tag/v1.7.3 and the appendix.
```

Although the appendix doesn't seem to detail other security issues?

Author: Hm, I don't feel that strong either way. I do consider leaking history "security sensitive", but that isn't a real security issue, I guess. Similarly injecting untrusted html into messages has been abused a few times and could be a security issue, but I don't know of any open ones, that can be abused for anything more than messing with what is displayed atm.

I'll just apply the suggestion and I don't think the exact wording if the appendix contains security issues or not isn't important enough to figure out a better way to word this.

## Unstable prefix

No unstable prefix should be necessary as clients aren't required to send reply
fallbacks for all messages since version 1.3 of the Matrix specification, which
changed the wording from "MUST" to "SHOULD".

## Appendix A: Support for rich replies in different clients

### Clients without rendering support for rich replies

> Of the 23 clients listed in the [matrix client matrix](https://matrix.org/clients-matrix)

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
Of the 23 clients listed in the [Matrix client matrix](https://matrix.org/clients-matrix)
```

16 are listed as not supporting replies (updated January 2022):

- Element Android: Relies on the reply fallback.

> - Element iOS: [Does not support rich replies](https://github.com/vector-im/element-ios/issues/3517)

Reviewer 7: ... and therefore relies on the reply fallback? So is the same as Element Android? or different?

Author: When that was written, yes. Although I didn't investigate more since I don't own any iOS device. But it seems Element iOS might have some support now based on https://github.com/element-hq/element-ios/pull/6155 ?

# MSC2781: Remove reply fallbacks from the specification

> Currently the specification suggest clients should send and strip a

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
Currently the specification suggests clients should send and strip a
```

* It is not possible to fully redact an event once it is replied to, this causes both trust & safety and right to be forgotten issues.
* There are a variety of implementation bugs related to reply fallback handling.

More details and considerations are provided in the appendices, but these are
provided for convenience and aren't necessary to understand this proposal.

## Proposal

Remove the [rich reply fallback from the
specification](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.10/client-server-api/#fallbacks-for-rich-replies).
Clients should stop sending them and should consider treating `<mx-reply>` parts
as either something to be unconditionally stripped or as something to be escaped
as invalid html.

Clients are not required to include a fallback in a reply since version 1.3 of
the
[specification](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.10/client-server-api/#rich-replies).
For this reason the reply fallbck can be removed from the specification without
any additional deprecation period.

An info box should be included to mention the historical use of the reply
fallback, suggesting that clients may encounter such events sent by other

> clients and that clients may need to strip out such fallbacks.

Reviewer: MSCs don't really get to dictate how a spec PR is reviewed. This paragraph should be removed.

(blocking concern)

Reviewer 13: I agree that the MSC shouldn't have control over the spec PR. However, this is a useful suggestion that the spec PR author could consider, and I think it's useful to keep it around for consideration.

Perhaps this can be reworded:

```suggestion
A suggestion for the spec PR: An info box could be included to mention
the historical use of the reply fallback, suggesting that clients may encounter
such events sent by other clients and that clients may need to strip out such
fallbacks.
```

That way the spec PR remains independent, yet the idea is not lost.

Given clients have had enough time to implement replies completely, the
overall look & feel of replies should be unchanged or even improved by this
proposal. Implementing replies in a client should also be a bit easier with this
change.

An extended motivation is provided at [the end of this document](#user-content-appendix-b-issues-with-the-current-fallbacks).

## Potential issues

Old events and events sent by clients implementing an older version of the
Matrix specification might still contain a reply fallback. So for at least some
period of time clients will still need to strip reply fallbacks from messages.

> Clients which don't implement rich replies or edits may see messages

Reviewer: I know I suggested this text, but I think I got confused when I wrote the comment. Is this MSC for reply fallbacks, edit fallbacks, or both? This should be clarified in the introduction and title if it's also affecting edits.

Author: I just removed the mention of edits, since this MSC is only about rich replies. Edits already suffered of this context loss for clients not implementing them+rich replies, since edits don't include a reply fallback (nor a reply relation).
